.\"    Copyright (C) 2002 Patrick Dangla
.\"
.\"    This file is part of the program BIL.
.\"
.\"    This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\"    it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\"    the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\"    (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\"    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\"    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\"    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\"    GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\"    You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\"    along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\"    Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
.\"
.\"    $Id: bil.1,v 1.1 2004/07/01 22:23:11 dangla Exp $
.\"
.TH Bil 1 "21 Sept 2004" "Bil 2.0" "Bil Manual Pages"
.UC 4



.SH NAME
Bil \- modeling platform based on finite element/volume methods



.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bil [option(s)] [file]



.SH DESCRIPTION
\fIBil\fR is a modeling platform based on finite element/volume methods 
dedicated to coupled problems involved in environmental engineering, 
geomechanical engineering, material sciences, etc..

.PP

Without \fIoption\fR \fIBil\fR compute the solution of a problem 
described in \fIfile\fR.

.PP

\fIBil\fR is developped for 1D, 2D and 3D problems. It doesn't include 
a mesh generator and post-processing treatment of outputs. However it 
can read mesh files 
created by the open-source free software \fIGmsh\fR downloadable at 
http://www.geuz.org/gmsh/.
The output files created by \fIBil\fR for 1D problems can be used easily 
by some plotting programs as \fIGnuplot\fR. But as a general rule, 
post-processing options create output files which can be used by 
\fIGmsh\fR for post-processing treatments.



.SH COMPUTATION OPTIONS

.TP 4
.B \-graph \fIfmt\fR
print the graph in \fIfile\fR\fB.graph\fR in the format \fIfmt\fR. Available formats are:
.RS
\fBmetis\fR: for METIS (if installed)
.RE
.RS
\fBhsl_mc40\fR: for HSL_MC40
.RE

.TP 4
.B \-iperm
print the inverse permutation of nodes in \fIfile\fR\fB.graph.iperm\fR by HSL_MC40.

.TP 4
.B \-eordering \fImeth\fR
print the inverse permutation of elements in file \fIfile\fR\fB.graph.iperm\fR 
by the method \fImeth\fR. Available methods are:
.RS
\fBhsl_mc43\fR
.RE

.TP 4
.B \-nordering \fImeth\fR
print the inverse permutation of nodes in file \fIfile\fR\fB.graph.iperm\fR 
by the method \fImeth\fR. Available methods are:
.RS
\fBhsl_mc40\fR (same as -iperm)
.RE

.TP 4
.B \-solver \fImethod\fR
use a solver defined by \fImethod\fR. Available methods are:
.RS
\fBcrout\fR: CROUT method (default).
.RE
.RS
\fBslu\fR  : SuperLU (if installed).
.RE
.RS
\fBma38\fR : MA38 from HSL (if BLAS library installed).
.RE



.SH POST-PROCESSING OPTIONS

.TP 4
.B \-post \fIfmt\fR
generate the post-processing files \fIfile\fR\fB.pos\fR* in the format \fIfmt\fR. Available formats are: 
.RS
\fBGmshParsed\fR: for GMSH parsed file format.
.RE
.RS
\fBGmshASCII\fR : for GMSH ASCII file format.
.RE



.SH OTHER OPTIONS

.TP 4
.B \-readonly
parse \fIfile\fR, then exit. 

.TP 4
.B \-debug \fIinput\fR
show data structure for \fIinput\fR. Available inputs are:
.RS
\fBgeom\fR: geometry
.RE
.RS
\fBmesh\fR: mesh
.RE
.RS
\fBmate\fR: materials
.RE
.RS
\fBfield\fR: fields
.RE
.RS
\fBinit\fR: initialization
.RE
.RS
\fBfunc\fR: functions
.RE
.RS
\fBbcond\fR: boundary conditions
.RE
.RS
\fBload\fR: loads
.RE
.RS
\fBpoin\fR: points
.RE
.RS
\fBobval\fR: objective variations
.RE
.RS
\fBiter\fR: iterative process
.RE
.RS
\fBtime\fR: time steps
.RE
.RS
\fBall\fR: all the dataset above
.RE
.RS
\fBinter\fR: interpolation functions
.RE
.RS
\fBcontinuity\fR: equations and unknowns at nodes
.RE
.RS
\fBmatrix\fR: the matrix
.RE
.RS
\fBresidu\fR: the residu
.RE


.TP 4
.B \-help
online help.

.TP 4
.B \-info
display general informations.

.TP 4
.B \-model
display the available models.

.TP 4
.B \-model \fImymodel\fR
display an example of material properties for the model \fImymodel\fR.

.TP 4
.B \-modules
display the available modules.



.SH AUTHOR
Patrick Dangla (patrick.dangla@ifsttar.fr).



.SH SEE ALSO
The full documentation for Bil is maintained as a Texinfo manual. If the
\fBinfo\fR and \fBbil\fR are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info bil
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
